Revamp nodejs docs (#531)
appsignal/appsignal-docs: source/nodejs/instrumentation/instrumentation.html.md

### Creating a child `Span`

A `ChildSpan` can be created to represent a subdivision of the total length of time represented by the `RootSpan`. This is useful for instrumenting blocks of code that are run inside of the lifetime of a `RootSpan`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
```

A `ChildSpan` can also be created by passing an optional second argument to `tracer.createSpan()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const childSpan = tracer.createSpan(undefined, rootSpan);
```

After a `Span` is created, you can begin adding data to it using methods on the `Span` object. `ChildSpan`s and `RootSpan`s share the same interface.

### Configuring a `Span`

#### Naming a `Span`

Set the name for a given `Span`. The Span name is used in the UI to group like requests together.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
```

#### Naming a `Span` category

> Set the category for a given `Span`. The category groups Spans together in the "Slow Events" feature, and in the "Sample breakdown".

Reviewer: Oh the event grouping is no longer based on the name? TIL I guess?

Author: I actually took that explanation from [here](https://github.com/appsignal/appsignal-nodejs/blob/main/packages/nodejs/src/interfaces/span.ts#L60-L64). Let me know if that is not correct.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
```

#### Adds sanitized SQL data as a string to a `Span`

When called with a single argument, the `value` will be applied to the span as the body, which will show the sanitized query in your dashboard.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
childSpan.setQuery(queryObj);
```
#### Adding metadata to a `Span`

> More information on this is available [here](/guides/custom-data/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [custom data guide](/guides/custom-data/).
```

#### Adding an error to a `Span`

> More information on this is available [here](/nodejs/tracing/exception-handling.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [exception handling page](/nodejs/instrumentation/exception-handling.html).
```

### Closing a `Span`

As `Span`s represent a length of time, they must be given a finish time once all the operations that the `Span` is timing have completed. You do this by calling `span.close()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const span = tracer.currentSpan();
span.setName("Query.sql.model.action");

// do stuff...

span.close();
```

If the `RootSpan` is created by the core `http` integration (the most common case), the `RootSpan` is closed automatically by the integration. If any children of this `RootSpan` are left unclosed, then they are dropped from the trace.

> #### Complete example

Reviewer: Wow the Node.js integration is in need of an `instrument` function like the other integrations.

Author: Yes, that will be nice to have.

### Creating a child `Span`

A `ChildSpan` can be created to represent a subdivision of the total length of time represented by the `RootSpan`. This is useful for instrumenting blocks of code that are run inside of the lifetime of a `RootSpan`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
```

A `ChildSpan` can also be created by passing an optional second argument to `tracer.createSpan()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const childSpan = tracer.createSpan(undefined, rootSpan);
```

After a `Span` is created, you can begin adding data to it using methods on the `Span` object. `ChildSpan`s and `RootSpan`s share the same interface. After you are done instrumenting the block of code you need to [close](#closing-a-span) the span.

### Configuring a `Span`

#### Naming a `Span`

Set the name for a given `Span`. The Span name is used in the UI to group similar requests together.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();

> const childSpan = rootSpan.child();

Author: A separate issue has been created for this. This PR is mostly about the structure.

childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
```

#### Naming a `Span` category

Set the category for a given `Span`. The category groups Spans together in the "Slow Events" feature, and in the "Sample breakdown".

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
```

#### Adds sanitized SQL data as a string to a `Span`

> When called with a single argument, the `value` will be applied to the span as the body, which will show the sanitized query in your dashboard.

Author: We can improve that later, this PR just structures the nodejs documentation to follow the same pattern as ruby and elixir.

> When called with a single argument, the `value` will be applied to the span as the body, which will show the sanitized query in your dashboard.

Reviewer: I've addressed this issue in PR #543.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
const queryObj = "YOUR-QUERY";
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
childSpan.setSQL(queryObj);
```
#### Adding metadata to a `Span`

For more information, see the [custom data guide](/guides/custom-data/).

#### Adding an error to a `Span`

For more information, see the [exception handling page](/nodejs/instrumentation/exception-handling.html).

### Closing a `Span`

As `Span`s represent a length of time, they must be given a finish time once all the operations that the `Span` is timing have completed. You do this by calling `span.close()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const span = tracer.currentSpan();
span.setName("Query.sql.model.action");

// do stuff...

> span.close();

Author: Nice catch, I have updated the example.

---
title: "Custom instrumentation for Node.js"
---

In order to find out what specific pieces of code are causing performance problems it's useful to add custom instrumentation to your application. This allows us to create better breakdowns of which code runs slowest and what type of action the most amount of time was spent on.

## The Tracer object

AppSignal for Node.js contains a new concept that is different from the current Ruby implementation - the `Tracer` object. The `Tracer` object contains various methods that you might use when creating your own custom instrumentation.

The Tracer is responsible for tracking the currently active `Span`, and exposes functions for creating and activating new `Span`s.

### Retrieving the `Tracer`

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
```

> If the agent is currently inactive (you must actively set it as such by setting `active: true`), then the AppSignal client will return an instance of `NoopTracer`, which is safe to call within your code as if the agent were currently active but does not record any data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the agent is currently inactive (you must set it as such yourself, by setting `active: true`), then the AppSignal client will return a tracer object that does nothing. It is safe to call this tracer object within your code as you would if the integration was active, but it will not record any data.
```

Not sure if we should mention `NoopTracer` by name, it's an implementation detail.

## Creating and using a Span

A `Span` is the name of the object that we use to capture data about the performance of your application, any errors and any surrounding context. A `Span` can form a part of a broader **trace**, a hierarchical representation of the flow of data through your application.

Each `Span` contains the following metadata:

- A name
- A start and finish timestamp
- Tags

> - Sample data

Reviewer 2: Note that only the root span can have tags and sample data. Not sure if that should be mentioned (or not mentioned) here, or if the mention in the custom data guide linked below suffices. Below, on "Retrieving the current `RootSpan`", it is mentioned that you must retrieve the root span to add custom instrumentation -- I don't know if that refers to the tags and sample data, it's not clear to me.

Author: I made an improvement to that

- The guide to adding tags now mentions they need to add tags on root span, the guide of sample data already mentions thats.
- Retrieving the root span hyperlinks to configuring span and creating child span

- The parent `Span`s ID (if any)

> - `SpanContext` identification of a `Span`

Reviewer 2: This `SpanContext` is never mentioned again. Is it relevant?

Author: You are correct, I will remove that as it might cause confusion.

### Retrieving the current `Span`

The currently active `Span` can be recalled to add data to it or create `ChildSpan`s from it.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const span = tracer.currentSpan();
```

### Retrieving the current `RootSpan`

In most cases, a `RootSpan` will be created by one of our automatic instrumentations, e.g. the `http` module integration. To add any custom instrumentation to your trace, you'll need to retrieve that `RootSpan` using the `Tracer` instance.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
```

Once you have the current `RootSpan`, you'll be able to add data to it and create `ChildSpan`s from it. If a current `Span` is not available, then `tracer.rootSpan()` will return a `NoopSpan`.

### Creating a `Span`

A `Span` can be created by calling `tracer.createSpan()`, which initializes a new `RootSpan` if there's no current `RootSpan` on the _scope_ or a `ChildSpan` of the present `RootSpan`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const span = tracer.createSpan();
```

> A `RootSpan` is a type of `Span` which encapsulates the end-to-end latency for the entire request. As a `Span` is created, its start time is recorded. To give the span an end time, the `Span` must be [closed](#closing-a-span) when all the operations that the `Span` is recording are finished.

Reviewer 2: Do child spans not need to be closed as well? This seems to imply closing spans is specific to the root span.

There's a section below about closing spans. Perhaps it doesn't need to be mentioned here.

Author: Child `span` needs to be closed as well and I have added that statement now.

When a `Span` is created, it is not bound to any _scope_. This means it cannot be recalled again from a different place in your app without first being given a _scope_. Read more about scopes [here](scopes.html).

### Creating a child `Span`

A `ChildSpan` can be created to represent a subdivision of the total length of time represented by the `RootSpan`. This is useful for instrumenting blocks of code that are run inside of the lifetime of a `RootSpan`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
```

A `ChildSpan` can also be created by passing an optional second argument to `tracer.createSpan()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const childSpan = tracer.createSpan(undefined, rootSpan);
```

After a `Span` is created, you can begin adding data to it using methods on the `Span` object. `ChildSpan`s and `RootSpan`s share the same interface.

### Configuring a `Span`

#### Naming a `Span`

> Set the name for a given `Span`. The Span name is used in the UI to group like requests together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the name for a given `Span`. The Span name is used in the UI to group similar requests together.
```

const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
```

#### Adds sanitized SQL data as a string to a `Span`

When called with a single argument, the `value` will be applied to the span as the body, which will show the sanitized query in your dashboard.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
const queryObj = "YOUR-QUERY";
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");
childSpan.setSQL(queryObj);
```
#### Adding metadata to a `Span`

For more information, see the [custom data guide](/guides/custom-data/).

#### Adding an error to a `Span`

For more information, see the [exception handling page](/nodejs/instrumentation/exception-handling.html).

### Closing a `Span`

As `Span`s represent a length of time, they must be given a finish time once all the operations that the `Span` is timing have completed. You do this by calling `span.close()`.

```js
const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const span = tracer.currentSpan();
span.setName("Query.sql.model.action");

// do stuff...

span.close();
```

> If the `RootSpan` is created by the core `http` integration (the most common case), the `RootSpan` is closed automatically by the integration. If any children of this `RootSpan` are left unclosed, then they are dropped from the trace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `RootSpan` is created by the core `http` instrumentation (the most common case), the `RootSpan` is closed automatically by the instrumentation. If any children of this `RootSpan` are left unclosed, then they are dropped from the trace. Generally speaking, you should close the spans that you create, but not the spans that are created by the instrumentations.
```

Added some sort of guidance about which spans you should be concerned about closing.

const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
const queryObj = "YOUR-QUERY";
childSpan.setName("Query.sql.model.action");
childSpan.setCategory("get.query");

> childSpan.setQuery(queryObj);

Reviewer 3: I've been searching through the code and I cannot find any `setQuery()` function. Does this really work?

Author: Just realized I typed it wrong, it is actually [setSQL](https://github.com/appsignal/appsignal-nodejs/blob/main/packages/nodejs/src/interfaces/span.ts#L107), and yes it works.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5089055/150155492-779179bc-9218-4d48-acd2-76d12764f98a.png)

```
  // Span for the query
  const tracer = appsignal.tracer();
  const rootSpan = tracer.rootSpan();
  // const childSpan = tracer.createSpan({namespace: "custom-namespace"});

  const childSpan = rootSpan.child();
  const user_name = 'Shairyar';
  childSpan.setName(`Query.sql.model.action`);
  childSpan.setCategory("get.query2");
  childSpan.setSQL("select * from users where name = ?", user_name);
  childSpan.close();
```

Author: It has been fixed.
